README.md, before:

# rxnebm
Energy-based modeling of chemical reactions

## Environmental setup
### Using conda
    bash -i setup.sh
    conda activate rxnebm

## Data preparation
### Download pre-cleaned data with augmented negatives
    python download_data.py

The downloaded data is automatically checked and will throw an error if any required file is missing.
See Appendix A for a full description of data preprocessing.
 
## Train and test
    sh scripts/train_rdm_5_cos_5_bit_5_1_1_mut_10.sh
 
## Finetuning
Before finetuning, ensure you have 1) the 3 CSV files 2) the 3 precomputed reaction data files (be it fingerprints, rxn_smi, graphs etc.). In terms of arguments, you additionally need to provide --old_expt_name and --date_trained (DD_MM_YYYY).
    
    sh scripts/finetune_rdm_5_cos_5_bit_5_1_1_mut_10.sh 

## Folder organisation
```
 rxnebm
    ├── experiment
    │    ├── expt.py
    |    └── expt_utils.py
    ├── model
    |    ├── base.py
    │    ├── FF.py
    |    └── model_utils.py
    ├── data
    |    ├── dataset.py
    |    ├── augmentors.py
    |    ├── analyse_results.py
    |    ├── preprocess
    |    |        ├── clean_smiles.py    
    |    |        ├── smi_to_fp.py
    |    |        ├── prep_crem.py
    |    |        └── prep_nmslib.py
    |    ├── original_data  
    |    └── cleaned_data
    ├── proposer   
    |    ├── Retrosim_modified
    |    ├── retrosim_model.py
    |    ├── retrosim_proposer.py
    |    ├── GLN_original
    |    ├── gln_proposer.py
    |    ├── MT_karpov
    |    ├── mt_karpov_proposer.py
    ├── checkpoints
    └── scores
 ```

## Appendix A - Details of data preparation
### Data source
The data was obtained from [the dropbox folder](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/6ideflxcakrak10/AADN-TNZnuGjvwZYiLk7zvwra/schneider50k?dl=0&subfolder_nav_tracking=1) provided by the authors of [GLN](https://github.com/Hanjun-Dai/GLN). 
We rename these 3 csv files from ```raw_{phase}.csv``` to ```'schneider50k_train.csv'```, ```'schneider50k_test.csv'``` and ```'schneider50k_valid.csv'```, and save them to ```rxnebm/data/original_data``` <br>

### Data preprocessing
The entire data preprocessing pipeline can be run from ``` prepare_data.py ```, which performs a series of data cleaning & preprocessing steps, in the following order:
1. Cleans the raw SMILES strings
2. Extracts all unique molecule SMILES strings as a list
3. Converts unique molecule SMILES into a matrix of Morgan count molecular fingerprints.
4. Generates 2 lookup tables (dictionaries), 1 to map molecular SMILES strings into the corresponding index in that matrix of Morgan count fingerprints, and the other to map the reverse: index (key) --> molecular SMILES (value) 
5. Builds a nearest-neighbour search index using the [nmslib](https://github.com/DrrDom/crem) package
6. Generates a (very) large database of [CReM](https://github.com/DrrDom/crem) negatives, mapping each product SMILES string in the dataset (key), to a list of highly similar, mutated product SMILES strings (value). Note that this step can take from 10-13 hours on the USPTO_50k dataset for 150 mutated products / original product, and that CReM does not guarantee the requested number of mutated products. To deal with this, we pad with vectors of all 0's, and implement a simple masking step in our network to ignore these vectors. <br>

### List of provided data for pre-training rxebm:
For ease of reproducibility, all data is [available on Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ISXFL7SuVY_sW3z36hQfpyDMH1KF22nS?usp=sharing). These belong in ```rxnebm/data/cleaned_data ```: 
- three ```50k_clean_rxnsmi_noreagent_{phase}.pickle``` files contain the cleaned reaction SMILES strings from USPTO_50k (generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/clean_smiles.py```)
- ```50k_mol_smis.pickle``` (list of all unique molecule SMILES, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/clean_smiles.py```) 
- ```50k_mol_smi_to_sparse_fp_idx.pickle``` (the lookup table mapping molecular SMILES to Morgan count molecular fingerprints by their index in the sparse matrix ```50k_count_mol_fps.npz```, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/smi_to_fp.py```) 
- ```50k_sparse_fp_idx_to_mol_smi.pickle``` (the lookup table mapping Morgan count molecular fingerprints by their index to molecular SMILES, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/smi_to_fp.py```) 
- ```50k_count_mol_fps.npz``` (matrix of Morgan count moelcular fingerprints, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/smi_to_fp.py```) 
- ```50k_cosine_count.bin``` & ```50k_cosine_count.bin.dat``` (generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/prep_nmslib.py```)
- ```50k_neg150_rad2_maxsize3_mutprodsmis.pickle``` (generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/prep_crem.py```). ```50k_neg150_rad2_maxsize3_insufficient.pickle``` is an optional (currently unused) dictionary mapping each product SMILES (key) for which CReM could not generate the requested number of mutated molecules, to the number of negatives (value) that CReM could generate. <br>
-  ```50k_rdm_5_cos_5_bit_5_1_1_mut_10_{split}.npz``` (a matrix of positive and augmented negative reaction fingerprints), the syntax being: ```{dataset_name}_rdm_{num_rdm_negs}_cos_{num_cos_negs}_bit_{num_bit_negs}_{num_bits}_{increment_bits}_mut_{num_mut_negs}_{split}.npz```

### Extra-clean data for training retrosynthesis models from scratch:
For our fine-tuning step, we trained a zoo of popular & state-of-the-art retrosynthesis models. For all of these models, we use a single, extra-clean USPTO_50k dataset, split roughly into 80/10/10. These are derived from the three ``` schneider50k_{phase}.csv ``` files, using the script ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/clean_smiles.py```. This data is included in this repository under ```rxnebm/data/cleaned_data/``` as ```50k_clean_rxnsmi_noreagent_allmapped_{phase}.pickle```, and also in the [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ISXFL7SuVY_sW3z36hQfpyDMH1KF22nS?usp=sharing) sub-folder ```Retro_Reproduction``` 
Specifically, we perform these steps:
1. Keep all atom mapping
2. Remove reaction SMILES strings with product molecules that are too small and clearly incorrect. The criteria used was ```len(prod_smi) < 3```. 4 reaction SMILES strings were caught by this criteria, with products: 		
    - ```'CN[C@H]1CC[C@@H](c2ccc(Cl)c(Cl)c2)c2ccc([I:19])cc21>>[IH:19]'```
    - ```'O=C(CO)N1CCC(C(=O)[OH:28])CC1>>[OH2:28]'```
    - ```'CC(=O)[Br:4]>>[BrH:4]'```
    - ```'O=C(Cn1c(-c2ccc(Cl)c(Cl)c2)nc2cccnc21)[OH:10]>>[OH2:10]'```
3. Remove all duplicate reaction SMILES strings
4. Remove reaction SMILES in the training data that overlap with validation/test sets + validation data that overlap with the test set.
    - test_appears_in_train: 50
    - test_appears_in_valid: 6
    - valid_appears_in_train: 44
5. Finally, we obtain an (extra) clean dataset of reaction SMILES:
    - Train: 39713
    - Valid: 4989
    - Test: 5005
    
### Re-ranking task: proposal data from retrosynthesis models re-trained on our extra-clean data:
For each model in our model zoo, we generate the top-K predictions for each product SMILES in our extra-clean dataset. All of these files belong in ```rxnebm/data/cleaned_data ``` 
1. Retrosim, with top-200 predictions on 200 maximum precedents for the product similarity search: 
    - 3 CSV files of SMILES strings in the [Retrosim_proposals folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1HhzBwfa5Oykfxq11qM4oQIuw3ZGjJqYH). This is generated by ``` rxnebm/proposer/retrosim_model.py ```. This step took ~13 hours on an average 8-cores machine. You only need to run this python script again if you wish to get more than top-200 predictions, or beyond 200 max precedents; otherwise, just download our version using ``` download_data.py ```
    - 3 .npz files of sparse reaction fingerprints ``` retrosim_rxn_fps_{phase}.npz ``` in the [datasets folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ISXFL7SuVY_sW3z36hQfpyDMH1KF22nS). This is generated by ``` process_retrosim_proposals.py ```, which **requires the above 3 CSV files**. In reality, only 37.5 precursors are successfully proposed by Retrosim. For fingerprints, we pad with all-zero vectors and mask these during training & testing. Currently ``` process_retrosim_proposals.py ``` supports fingerprints and rxn_smiles only. 

## Appendix B - Misc details
This project uses ``` black ``` for auto-formatting to the ``` pep8 ``` style guide, and ``` isort ``` to sort imports. ``` pylint ``` is also used in ``` vscode ``` to lint all code.

Commit message:

Add gen_gln.py; integrate into proc_proposals.py (renamed from process_retrosim_proposals.py)

README.md, after:

# rxnebm
Energy-based modeling of chemical reactions

## Environmental setup
### Using conda
    bash -i setup.sh
    conda activate rxnebm

## Data preparation
### Download pre-cleaned data with augmented negatives
    python download_data.py

The downloaded data is automatically checked and will throw an error if any required file is missing.
See Appendix A for a full description of data preprocessing.
 
## Train and test
    sh scripts/train_rdm_5_cos_5_bit_5_1_1_mut_10.sh
 
## Finetuning
Before finetuning, ensure you have 1) the 3 CSV files 2) the 3 precomputed reaction data files (be it fingerprints, rxn_smi, graphs etc.). In terms of arguments, you additionally need to provide --old_expt_name and --date_trained (DD_MM_YYYY).
    
    sh scripts/finetune_rdm_5_cos_5_bit_5_1_1_mut_10.sh 

## Folder organisation
```
 rxnebm
    ├── experiment
    │    ├── expt.py
    |    └── expt_utils.py
    ├── model
    |    ├── base.py
    │    ├── FF.py
    |    └── model_utils.py
    ├── data
    |    ├── dataset.py
    |    ├── augmentors.py
    |    ├── analyse_results.py
    |    ├── preprocess
    |    |        ├── clean_smiles.py    
    |    |        ├── smi_to_fp.py
    |    |        ├── prep_crem.py
    |    |        └── prep_nmslib.py
    |    ├── original_data  
    |    └── cleaned_data
    ├── proposer   
    |    ├── Retrosim_modified
    |    ├── retrosim_model.py
    |    ├── retrosim_proposer.py
    |    ├── GLN_original
    |    ├── gln_proposer.py
    |    ├── MT_karpov
    |    ├── mt_karpov_proposer.py
    ├── checkpoints
    └── scores
 ```

## Appendix A - Details of data preparation
### Data source
The data was obtained from [the dropbox folder](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/6ideflxcakrak10/AADN-TNZnuGjvwZYiLk7zvwra/schneider50k?dl=0&subfolder_nav_tracking=1) provided by the authors of [GLN](https://github.com/Hanjun-Dai/GLN). 
We rename these 3 csv files from ```raw_{phase}.csv``` to ```'schneider50k_train.csv'```, ```'schneider50k_test.csv'``` and ```'schneider50k_valid.csv'```, and save them to ```rxnebm/data/original_data``` <br>

### Data preprocessing
The entire data preprocessing pipeline can be run from ``` prepare_data.py ```, which performs a series of data cleaning & preprocessing steps, in the following order:
1. Cleans the raw SMILES strings
2. Extracts all unique molecule SMILES strings as a list
3. Converts unique molecule SMILES into a matrix of Morgan count molecular fingerprints.
4. Generates 2 lookup tables (dictionaries), 1 to map molecular SMILES strings into the corresponding index in that matrix of Morgan count fingerprints, and the other to map the reverse: index (key) --> molecular SMILES (value) 
5. Builds a nearest-neighbour search index using the [nmslib](https://github.com/DrrDom/crem) package
6. Generates a (very) large database of [CReM](https://github.com/DrrDom/crem) negatives, mapping each product SMILES string in the dataset (key), to a list of highly similar, mutated product SMILES strings (value). Note that this step can take from 10-13 hours on the USPTO_50k dataset for 150 mutated products / original product, and that CReM does not guarantee the requested number of mutated products. To deal with this, we pad with vectors of all 0's, and implement a simple masking step in our network to ignore these vectors. <br>

### List of provided data for pre-training rxebm:
For ease of reproducibility, all data is [available on Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ISXFL7SuVY_sW3z36hQfpyDMH1KF22nS?usp=sharing). These belong in ```rxnebm/data/cleaned_data ```: 
- three ```50k_clean_rxnsmi_noreagent_{phase}.pickle``` files contain the cleaned reaction SMILES strings from USPTO_50k (generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/clean_smiles.py```)
- ```50k_mol_smis.pickle``` (list of all unique molecule SMILES, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/clean_smiles.py```) 
- ```50k_mol_smi_to_sparse_fp_idx.pickle``` (the lookup table mapping molecular SMILES to Morgan count molecular fingerprints by their index in the sparse matrix ```50k_count_mol_fps.npz```, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/smi_to_fp.py```) 
- ```50k_sparse_fp_idx_to_mol_smi.pickle``` (the lookup table mapping Morgan count molecular fingerprints by their index to molecular SMILES, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/smi_to_fp.py```) 
- ```50k_count_mol_fps.npz``` (matrix of Morgan count moelcular fingerprints, generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/smi_to_fp.py```) 
- ```50k_cosine_count.bin``` & ```50k_cosine_count.bin.dat``` (generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/prep_nmslib.py```)
- ```50k_neg150_rad2_maxsize3_mutprodsmis.pickle``` (generated by ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/prep_crem.py```). ```50k_neg150_rad2_maxsize3_insufficient.pickle``` is an optional (currently unused) dictionary mapping each product SMILES (key) for which CReM could not generate the requested number of mutated molecules, to the number of negatives (value) that CReM could generate. <br>
-  ```50k_rdm_5_cos_5_bit_5_1_1_mut_10_{split}.npz``` (a matrix of positive and augmented negative reaction fingerprints), the syntax being: ```{dataset_name}_rdm_{num_rdm_negs}_cos_{num_cos_negs}_bit_{num_bit_negs}_{num_bits}_{increment_bits}_mut_{num_mut_negs}_{split}.npz```

### Extra-clean data for training retrosynthesis models from scratch:
For our fine-tuning step, we trained a zoo of popular & state-of-the-art retrosynthesis models. For all of these models, we use a single, extra-clean USPTO_50k dataset, split roughly into 80/10/10. These are derived from the three ``` schneider50k_{phase}.csv ``` files, using the script ```rxnebm/data/preprocess/clean_smiles.py```. This data is included in this repository under ```rxnebm/data/cleaned_data/``` as ```50k_clean_rxnsmi_noreagent_allmapped_{phase}.pickle```, and also in the [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ISXFL7SuVY_sW3z36hQfpyDMH1KF22nS?usp=sharing) sub-folder ```Retro_Reproduction``` 
Specifically, we perform these steps:
1. Keep all atom mapping
2. Remove reaction SMILES strings with product molecules that are too small and clearly incorrect. The criteria used was ```len(prod_smi) < 3```. 4 reaction SMILES strings were caught by this criteria, with products: 		
    - ```'CN[C@H]1CC[C@@H](c2ccc(Cl)c(Cl)c2)c2ccc([I:19])cc21>>[IH:19]'```
    - ```'O=C(CO)N1CCC(C(=O)[OH:28])CC1>>[OH2:28]'```
    - ```'CC(=O)[Br:4]>>[BrH:4]'```
    - ```'O=C(Cn1c(-c2ccc(Cl)c(Cl)c2)nc2cccnc21)[OH:10]>>[OH2:10]'```
3. Remove all duplicate reaction SMILES strings
4. Remove reaction SMILES in the training data that overlap with validation/test sets + validation data that overlap with the test set.
    - test_appears_in_train: 50
    - test_appears_in_valid: 6
    - valid_appears_in_train: 44
5. Finally, we obtain an (extra) clean dataset of reaction SMILES:
    - Train: 39713
    - Valid: 4989
    - Test: 5005
    
### Re-ranking task: proposal data from retrosynthesis models re-trained on our extra-clean data:
For each model in our model zoo, we generate the top-K predictions for each product SMILES in our extra-clean dataset. All of these files belong in ```rxnebm/data/cleaned_data ``` 
1. Retrosim, with top-200 predictions on 200 maximum precedents for the product similarity search: 
    - 3 CSV files of SMILES strings in the [Retrosim_proposals folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1HhzBwfa5Oykfxq11qM4oQIuw3ZGjJqYH). This is generated by ``` rxnebm/proposer/retrosim_model.py ```. This step took ~13 hours on an average 8-cores machine. You only need to run this python script again if you wish to get more than top-200 predictions, or beyond 200 max precedents; otherwise, just download our version using ``` download_data.py ```
    - 3 .npz files of sparse reaction fingerprints ``` retrosim_rxn_fps_{phase}.npz ``` in the [datasets folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ISXFL7SuVY_sW3z36hQfpyDMH1KF22nS). This is generated by ``` proc_proposals.py ```, which **requires the above 3 CSV files**. In reality, an average of only 37.5 precursors per product SMILES are successfully proposed by Retrosim.
    - For fingerprints, we pad with all-zero vectors and mask these during training & testing. 
    - Currently ``` proc_proposals.py ``` supports fingerprints and rxn_smiles only. 
    - From current experiments, just training on the top-50 predictions is sufficient and yields the same performance as training on more predictions (e.g. top-100/200)

## Appendix B - Misc details
This project uses ``` black ``` for auto-formatting to the ``` pep8 ``` style guide, and ``` isort ``` to sort imports. ``` pylint ``` is also used in ``` vscode ``` to lint all code.
